# The paradox of the egocentric software department

Software departments and engineers. A group of individuals with a skill set around abstract thinking, problem solving paired with a high level of technical knowledge in software development to transcribe a given solution into code. Engineers usually grade and judge themselves by a varying combination of strengths in those areas. The whole industry asses an engineer's quality mostly by the same schema. How many years of experience. How many programming languages. How big were the problems the organisations the engineer worked for had. How well can the engineer write an algorithm to compute prime numbers.

A whole industry is seeking to find the best egocentric engineers without noticing the discrepancy of what groups of people are confronted with on a daily basis. This becomes a systemic problem by the market and hiring. Leading to companies being an assembled group of people who have been sharpening and defining their skills in areas which are orthogonal to problems modern engineering departments face. Mood and culture management, vision communication, transparency and openness and worst the disallowance to feel vulnerable and fail as a group.

On the back of the rise of agile software engineering communication skills and the ability to work in teams seems to have become unexpectedly more important. An industry blindly continuing constructing teams under the assumption to increase the sum by having the best individuals. This has interesting results in an industry which seems to increasingly fail to teach, diffuse knowledge, allow failure and embrace the human side of engineering. Ending up with deadline driven, project oriented engineering departments aiming the fire-extinguisher where ever random flames show up. Yielding an endless vicious circle of everybody feeling busy, everything being important whilst the organisation burns out on bad mood being forced to deliver.

Let us as an industry be honest with ourselves. We can all teach each other another programming language after haven gotten the fundamentals right. We can all collaborate on writing good and efficient algorithms. We can push each other while sharing and helping one another. We should take up responsibilities where the vacuums are and not negate everything holding up our job titles and certificates. Delivery will just fall off the back of that while the mission and ideals are set. Sadly, those are still all the easy bits. The hard bits are bound to humans interactions and communication. The ability to not step on each others' toes while talking honestly. To not get defensive and crushing somebody else's feeling when feeling vulnerable. The subtle things which are hard to learn yet are essential to an engineer's and an organisation's maturity and are almost never put significance on.

People will deliver and solve problems, they somehow have an inherent drive to. Technical skills are just the not a very applicable indicator to predict it. They just have be able to collaborate. Spark ideas and push each other and not stir their own soup improving their own stance and career advancement. The stage has to be set though for a theater piece to take place and not the whole act being a bunch of technically skilled string puppets being moved by higher forces.
