---
title: The fear and addiction within GTD (Getting Things Done)
slug: the-fear-and-addiction-within-gtd-getting-things-done
isPublished: true
---

> Getting things done for the sake of getting them done has a high risk of getting the wrong overall thing done.

We are well trained to think in terms of efficiency. We admire seeing
progress, things moving on a board. We almost morbidly write and move
stickies. We takes and make bullet points and todo lists. We await the moment
when something is done when we can finally tick it off - stop thinking about
it. We can then again shift focus to something new, to something more
important. Things just have to move forward. Eventually we will end up
somewhere. We fear the standstill, everything coming to a halt. We would feel
useless. We would feel lost - as in we lost.

In order to see progress we slice things up. We make chunks digestible
allowing us visualise a progress. As a result allowing us to nurse our thirst.
In turn we often forget to look at the sum of all parts. Tt is eventually even
painful. So we avoid it after all. All progress within a process ultimately
becomes an end in itself. It often fails to uncover the diamond of each
business: the value proposition. Often times our processes and working
methodologies focus on maximising throughput. Assuming: the more the merrier
and the bigger the better. We should keep in mind that whenever the input is
shoddy its output will be shabby. We might want to stop whenever we fail to
justify the work in our process pipe. To question how it interacts with other
business objectives. We after all might uncover a decay of business value
within our work package. We should then be allowed to come to a halt and pivot
rather than having to drive it through driven by the fear of sunk costs. Let
us accept delivery failure as success and delivery success as a potential
failure. In all that, our processes should guide doing the right thing at the
right time rather than feeding an addiction in ourselves.

We get attracted to the mindset of busy and get insecure when everyone around
us works a productivity system and we do not. All are crushing those todos as
if there was no tomorrow. We should however take pride in questioning the
illusion of productivity. We should not feel pressured to move forward and to
show progress by all means - improving to more progress only. Doing as little
as necessary with as little concurrency as needed, as simple as possible,
should feel right. Should feel pretty awesome. Should make us feel successful.
A process will eventually fall out of it, uncovering business value and
visualise it properly. It should force us to the few little things impactful
and put us on a cold turkey from our addiction of getting things done.

> Doing things erroneous at false times might be more harmful than doing nothing at all.

Now get back to your productivity system.
